### Using Python in Interactive mode
To enter Python interactive mode, simply enter `python` at the terminal. If you have installed Python and have the interpreter in the right location (-i.e. at `/usr/local/bin/python`), you will encounter something like this:

```Python
Windows PowerShell
Copyright (C) Microsoft Corporation. All rights reserved.

Try the new cross-platform PowerShell https://aka.ms/pscore6

Loading personal and system profiles took 734ms.
(base) PS C:\Users\harry> python
Python 3.8.5 (default, Sep  3 2020, 21:29:08) [MSC v.1916 64 bit (AMD64)] :: Anaconda, Inc. on win32
Type "help", "copyright", "credits" or "license" for more information.
>>>

```

In this mode it prompts for the next command with the _primary prompt_, usually three greater-than signs (`>>>`); for continuation lines it prompts with the _secondary prompt_, by default three dots (`...`). Using Python in interactive mode feels similar the command prompt in Matlab.

### Python Modules
Writing a large program in interactive mode can be restrictive, and the better method is usually to write a script and use python interpreter to execute the script. For example, you can create a `hello_world.py` script to print `Hello World!` to the terminal:

```Python
print("Hello World!")
```

To run the script, run `python` followed by the script's name.

```
(base) PS C:\Users\harry> python hello_world.py
Hello World!
```
When writing a large program, it is common to break the program into smaller components for easier maintenance.  Python modules are files with definitions and statements that can be imported into other modules or into the main module. The filename is the module's name with the suffix `.py`. For instance, the following `area.py` module defines the areas of different 2D shapes: 

```Python
def rec_area(height,width):
	return height*width

def triangle_area(base,height):
	return base*height*1/2

def circle_area(radius):
	return math.pi*radius**2
```

The `area.py` module can be imported into the `main.py` module:
```Python
import area
print(area.rec_area(1,2))
print(area.triangle_area(3,4))
```

Note that you can choose to 
- Import specific functions from a module -i.e
```Python
from area import rec_area
```
- Import all functions - i.e. 
```Python
from area import *
```
- Import with renaming the module: 
```Python
import area as A
```
- Import with renaming a module's function:
```Python
from area import rec_area as recA
```

### Runing Python module as a script:
When you run a python module directly, the code in the module will be executed just as if you imported it, but with `__name__` set to `__main__`. You will sometimes see a module structured like this: 

```Python
def rec_area(height,width):
	return height*width

def triangle_area(base,height):
	return base*height*1/2

def circle_area(radius):
	return math.pi*radius**2

if __name__ == "__main__":
	print(rec_area(100,1))
```
The last bit will only get executed if you run a python module directly as a script. If you import the `area` module into another module, the `print(rec_area(100,1))` command will not be executed, since the `__name__` is not set to `area` instead of `__main__`. This is often used either to provide a convenient user interface to a module, or for testing purposes (running the module as a script executes a test suite).

### The module's search path
When a module named `M` is imported, the interpreter looks for `M` in the `built-in` modules. If not found, it looks for files with the name `M.py` in a list of directories given by the variable `sys.path`, which includes:
- The directory of the input script, 
- PYTHONPATH (a list of directory names, with the same syntax as the shell variable `PATH`).
- The installation-dependent default (by convention including a `site-packages` directory, handled by the [`site`](https://docs.python.org/3/library/site.html#module-site "site: Module responsible for site-specific configuration.") module).


