### Overview
The sources for this chapter's materials come from
- [The official tutorial on Python classes](https://docs.python.org/3/tutorial/classes.html)
- [The official language reference on data model](https://docs.python.org/3/reference/datamodel.html)
### Python data models
- Objects - are Python's abstraction for data. All data in Python is represented by objects. 
- Identity - can be considered to be the address of an object in memory. An object's identity never changes once created. To compare the identities of two objects, you can use the `is` operator. To get the identity in integer value, use `id()` function - i.e. `id(x)` returns the memory address where the object `x` is stored.
- Type - the type of an object determines what operations it can have and as an extension, its value. To check for the type of an object, the function is `type(x)`. An object's type is also unchangable. 
- Value - if the value of an object can be changed once set, the object is mutable; otherwise, it is immutable. The mutability property of an object is determined by its type: numeric and string literals and tuples are immutable, but lists and dictionaries are mutable. Note that there are caveats to the notion of immutability: an immutable container can contain mutable objects, and such mutable objects can have their values changed. However, the container is still considered immutable, because the collection of objects it contains cannot be changed. To put it simply, an immutable object can contain references to address of mutable objects, whose values can be changed. However, the act of changing the address of those references are not permitted. 
- Name - is the name of a given object. An assignment operator binds a name to an underlying object -i.e a name is simply a pointer to an object. The built-in function `dir()` allows us to see all names except for names defined in `builtins`. If an object is passed onto this function -i.e. `dir(object)`, this returns all attributes available for that object. 

Take a look at the following examples:

```Python
>>> dir() #Print names in local scope
['__annotations__', '__builtins__', '__doc__', '__loader__', '__name__', '__package__', '__spec__']
>>>
>>> x = 2
>>>
>>> dir() #A new name 'x' has been created 
['__annotations__', '__builtins__', '__doc__', '__loader__', '__name__', '__package__', '__spec__', 'x']
```

We will defer the explanations of the names such as `__loader__` for later sections. For now, you will notice that once a variable `x` is created, a new name `x` has been added to the local scope. Let's take a closer look and see what happen when you do the assignment operation:

```Python
>>> id(x)
140705204938560
>>> id(2)
140705204938560
```

The identity, or rather the address of `x` is the same as that of the integer literal 2. This means that by calling the assignment operator `x=2`, you bind the name `x` to the address of the object `2`. Depending on the implementation, setting `y=2` may or may not bind `y` to the same object `2`. For mutable data types, setting `x = [1,2,3]` and `y=[1,2,3]` will definitely create two distinct objects, and setting `x = y` will make `x` and `y` refer to the same object.

```Python
>>> x = [1,2,3]
>>> y = [1,2,3]
>>> id(x) == id(y)
False
>>> x = y
>>> id(x) == id(y)
True
```

#### More on mutability/immutability and assignment operator:
Have a look at the following example:

```Python
>>> x = 1 
>>> id(x)
140705781589792
>>> x += 1
>>> id(x)
140705781589824
>>> y = [1,2,3,4]
>>> id(y)
2424642739200
>>> y = [1,2,3]
>>> id(y)
2424642750912
```
Notice how the re-assignment binds names to objects different from the original, regardless of whether the original object is mutable or immutable (`x` to `2` from the original `1`, `y` to `[1,2,3]` from the original `[1,2,3,4]`). However, mutability allows for operations that change the contained values without changing the underlying objects, while immutability does not. This helps to explain some unexpected behaviours in Python: 

```Python
def change_value(x:list):
	print(f"Address of x in change value: {id(x)}")
	for i in range(len(x)):
		x[i] += 1

def does_not_change_value(x:list):
	print(f"Address of x in does not change value: {id(x)}")
	for index,i in enumerate(x):
		i+= 1

if __name__ == "__main__":
	array1 = [1,2,3,4]
	print(f"Address of array 1: {id(array1)}")
	array2 = [1,2,3,4]
	print(f"Address of array 2: {id(array2)}")
	change_value(array1)
	print(array1)
	does_not_change_value(array2)
	print(array2)

```

Output:

```
Address of array 1: 2617948902528
Address of array 2: 2617950856320
Address of x in change value: 2617948902528
[2, 3, 4, 5]
Address of x in does not change value: 2617950856320
[1, 2, 3, 4]
```
First of all, note that object parsing in Python is by reference - i.e. passing the address of the input argument. As such, the address of `array1` or `array2` in the function calls `change_value(array1)` and `does_not_change_value(array2)` is the same as the address of `x` in the function body. Naturally, from a C/C++ background, we would expect both `array1` and `array2` to have their values changed. However, the output shows that this is not the case:

In the `change_value` function, the reassignment `x[i]+=1` rebinds `x[i]` to a new object; in the `does_not_change_value` function, the reassignment `i+=1` rebinds `i` from `x[index]` to a new object *without* rebinding `x[index]` itself. This results in the difference in the output. This rebinding behavior for immutable objects is best demonstrated if you compare the addresses as follows: 
```Python
>>> x = 1
>>> y = x
>>> y is x
True
>>> (x,y)
(1, 1)
>>> y+=1
>>> y is x
False
>>> (x,y)
(1, 2)
>>> a = (1,2)
>>> b = a
>>> b is a 
True
>>> b = (3,4)
>>> b is a 
False
```
Fortunately, `mutable` objects behave somewhat similarly to what we know about pointers and pointer operations in C/C++:
```Python
>>> x = [1,2,3]
>>> id(x)
2172408118720
>>> x.append(4)
>>> x
[1,2,3,4]
>>> id(x)
2172408118720
>>> y = x
>>> y is x
True
>>> y.append(5)
>>> y is x
True
```
Hence care must be exercised when dealing with mutable function arguments using in-place operations (operations that change containing value without changing the underlying object such as `append`, `sort`,`pop`,`remove`, etc): 
```Python
def in_place_op(x:list):
	x.sort()
	x.pop()
	x.append(10)

if __name__ == "__main__":
	array = [4,3,2,1]
	in_place_op(array)
	print(array)
```
Output:
```Python
[1,2,3,10]
```
### Python Scopes and Namespaces

#### Namespaces

A namespace can be understood as a collection of names, which includes bindings to objects of different types - i.e. literals, sequences, functions, classes, etc. The current implementation of namespaces in Python is in the form of a dictionary, which include 
- The local namespace - i.e. in a function or class method.
- The enclosing namespace
- The global namespace - i.e the global names in a module.
- The built-in namespace - i.e. built-in functions and exceptions.

Note that the set of attributes of an object also forms a namespace on its own. The term attribute refers to any name following the dot. For example, for `x.__repr__`, `.__repr__`  is an attribute of object `x`. Additionally, different namespaces may have similar names, which may have no relation between one another. To get access to a name from a namespace, we can simply prepend the namespace before the name - i.e. `module.name`. This is best demonstrated by an example. Create a script `util.py` and `main.py`:

`util.py`:

```Python
x = 10

def pretty_print():
	print(x)

```

`main.py`

```Python
import util
x = -20

if __name__ == "__main__":
	print(dir())
	print(dir(util))
	print(x,util.x)
	util.pretty_print()
```

The output is as follows:

```Python
['__annotations__', '__builtins__', '__cached__', '__doc__', '__file__', '__loader__', '__name__', '__package__', '__spec__', 'util', 'x']
['__builtins__', '__cached__', '__doc__', '__file__', '__loader__', '__name__', '__package__', '__spec__', 'pretty_print', 'x']
-20 10
10
```

As mentioned previously, `dir()` lists all the current name in the main namespace. `dir(util)` lists all the names defined in the namespace `util`. In the output, the first line shows all the names in the main namespace and the second line shows the names of the `util` module. Note that when a module is imported, its name will be added to the current namespace (i.e. `util` in the first line), but the names of its attributes - i.e. `x` or `pretty_print` are not added to the global or main namespace. Also note that even though the name `x` are present in both namespaces, they represent different objects, one with value -20 and another with value 10. Functions defined in a module can make use of the names in the module's namespace - i.e. function `pretty_print` defined in `util` can get access to the name `x` which is treated as `global` name. We will touch on the scope of variable in the next section. 

If we add `from util import pretty_print`, the name `pretty_print` will now be visible in the main namespace:

```Python
import util
from util import pretty_print
x = -20

if __name__ == "__main__":
	print(dir())
```

Output:

```Python
['__annotations__', '__builtins__', '__cached__', '__doc__', '__file__', '__loader__', '__name__', '__package__', '__spec__', 'pretty_print', 'util', 'x']
```

You can remove any writtable attribute from namespace by using the `del` function. For example:

```Python
import util
from util import pretty_print
x = -20

if __name__ == "__main__":
	print(dir())
	del pretty_print
	print(dir())
```

Output:

```Python
['__annotations__', '__builtins__', '__cached__', '__doc__', '__file__', '__loader__', '__name__', '__package__', '__spec__', 'pretty_print', 'util', 'x']
['__annotations__', '__builtins__', '__cached__', '__doc__', '__file__', '__loader__', '__name__', '__package__', '__spec__', 'util', 'x']
```

We have deleted the attribute `pretty_print` from the main namespace, and the second line in the output shows that the name `pretty_print` has indeed been removed. We can also delete the attribute `pretty_print` from the `util` namespace by calling `del util.pretty_print`. Note that the `delete` function removes the binding between the name and the object but it does not remove the object from memory. The removal from memory is done automatically by Python garbage collection, the details of which are available in CPython gc module. Read-only attributes are not deletable. 

Namespaces are created at different moments and have different lifetimes. The namespace containing the built-in names is created when the Python interpreter starts up, and is never deleted. The global namespace for a module is created when the module definition is read in; normally, module namespaces also last until the interpreter quits. The local namespace for a function is created when the function is called, and deleted when the function returns or raises an exception that is not handled within the function. Of course, recursive invocations each have their own local namespace.

#### Scopes:
A scope is a textual region of a Python program where a namespace is directly accessible. “Directly accessible” here means that an unqualified reference (direct reference without going through the module.attribute format) to a name attempts to find the name in the namespace. Although scopes are determined statically, they are used dynamically. At any time during execution, there are 3 or 4 nested scopes whose namespaces are directly accessible:

-   the innermost scope, which is searched first, contains the local names
    
-   the scopes of any enclosing functions, which are searched starting with the nearest enclosing scope, contains non-local, but also non-global names
    
-   the next-to-last scope contains the current module’s global names
    
-   the outermost scope (searched last) is the namespace containing built-in names

Again, this is best demonstrated via an example: create the following `main.py` script:

```Python
x = 100
def foo():
	print(x, 'x' in dir())

if __name__ == "__main__":
	foo()
```

Output:

```Python
100, False
```

We first define `x` in the global namespace having a value of 100. Then in the print value function, we attempt to print the value of a variable `x` and determine whether `x` is an attribute of the local namespace. The output result shows that when a name is not available in the local namespace, it will look for a name in the enclosing namespace, in which case, is also the main module's global namespace. Now modify the print value function to have an inner function: 

```Python
x = 100
def foo():
	x = 50
	print(x,'x' in dir())

if __name__ == "__main__":
	foo()
```

Output:

```Python
50, True
```

The output shows that once we define `x=50` in the function `foo`, `x` is added to the local namespace, and will have a higher priority than its global counterpart. The same behaviour is also observed for inner functions:

```Python
x = 100
def foo():
	x = 50
	def inner_foo():
		x = 10
		print(x,'x' in dir())
	inner_foo()

if __name__ == "__main__":
	foo()
```

Output:

```Python
10, True
```

Here, `x` is defined in the inner most scope, having a value of 10, which has a higher priority than `x` in the enclosing scope, having a value of 50. To modify the scope of a variable, we can use the keywords `global` to bind the name to the global namespace and `nonlocal` to bind the name to the enclosing namespace. Have a look at the following example: 

```Python
y = 100
def foo():
	x = 50
	print(f"Enclosing x - before: {x}")
	def inner_foo():
		nonlocal x 
		x = -50 
		global y 
		y = -100
	inner_foo()
	print(f"Enclosing x - after: {x}")

if __name__ == "__main__":
	print(f"Global y - before: {y}")
	foo()
	print(f"Global y - after: {y}")
```

Output:

```Python
Global y - before: 100
Enclosing x - before: 50  
Enclosing x - after: -50  
Global y - after: -100 
```

It is important to realize that scopes are determined textually: the global scope of a function defined in a module is that module’s namespace, no matter from where or by what alias the function is called. Thus, the author of a module can use global variables in the module without worrying about accidental clashes with a user’s global variables. As an example, create the following scripts:
`utils.py`:
```Python
x = 100
def print_value():
	print(x)
```
`main.py`:
```Python
x = 10 
import util.print_value as print_value

if __name__ == "__main__":
	print_value()
```
Output:
```
100
```
This example demonstrates that even when the `print_value` function is imported into the `__main__` namespace, its global scope is the global namespace of the module `util`, in which the value of `x` is 100 and not 10 as in the `__main__` namespace. 

