### Python Classes
The sources for this chapter's materials come from
- [The official tutorial on Python classes](https://docs.python.org/3/tutorial/classes.html)
- [The official language reference on data model](https://docs.python.org/3/reference/datamodel.html)

#### Syntax and some terminologies
To define a class in Python, simply use the `class` keyword:

```Python
class DummyClass:
	pass
```

In our example, DummyClass is the class name, and the `pass` keyword is used in-place of the class body. Note that `pass` is usually used when you want to leave a function or a class definition blank without having any exception raised (either because you want to work on them later or because they dont need to have anything). When a class is defined, its name enters the current module's namespace, and assignments  defined in the class will be assigned to the class namespace. For instance: 

```Python
class DummyClass:
	x = 5

if __name__=="__main__":
	print('x' in dir(), 'DummyClass' in dir())
	print('x' in dir(DummyClass))
```

Output:

```Python
False, True
True
```

- Class instance - refer to an object of the defined class type. For example,

```Python
class Animal:
	animal_list = ['dog','cat']
	
	def print_list(self):
		print(self.animal_list)

if __name__=="__main__":
	x = Animal()
	print(type(x))
```

Output:
```Python
<class '__main__.Animal'>
```
In this example, `x` is an instance of the Animal class.

- Attributes - refer to the names attached to the object's namespace that can be acquired via `obj.name`. For example, `DummyClass.x` and `Animal.animal_list` are valid attribute references. 

- Methods - refer to functions that belong to an object. For example, the function `print_list` defined in the class Animal is a method defined for the Animal class. Note that you can call one class method in another method using the `self.method` format, provided it is defined:

```Python
class Adelaide:
	def print_welcome_message(self):
		print("Hi, welcome to Adelaide city!")
		self.print_covid_update()
	
	def print_covid_update(self):
		print("There were around 800 cases yesterday!")

if __name__ == "__main__":
	myCity = Adelaide()
	myCity.print_welcome_message()
```

Output
```Python
Hi, welcome to Adelaide city!
There were around 800 cases yesterday!
```
In this example, when the `print_welcome_message` is invoked, it also invokes the method `print_covid_update`.

#### More on class instantiation - the `__init__` method
Class instantiation - refers to the act of creating a class object. A special class method `.__init__` is defined once you want to instantiate a class instance with more information: 

```Python
class Car:
	def __init__(self,price:float=3000,car_type:str='sedan',manu:str="Honda"):
		self.price = price
		self.car_type  = car_type
		self.manu  = manu

if __name__=="__main__":
	firstCar = Car(5000,'hatchback') #Init with positional argument
	secondCar = Car(price=10000,car_type="SUV",manu="Ford") #Init with keyword arguments 
	car_list_info = [(20000,'SUV','Subaru'),(49000,'SUV','Toyota')]
	car_list = [Car(*info) for info in car_list_info] #Init using list comprehension and with tuple unpacking
	print(firstCar.price,firstCar.car_type,firstCar.manu)
```
Output:

```Python
5000 hatchback Honda
```

Note in the example how argument parsing for the class method `__init__` follows the same way for function argument parsing (default, positional, keyword arguments, etc). We can see that the idea behind `__init__` follows the same idea as parameterised class constructor in C++, with the goal to assign state values to an instance at construction/initialisation. For `__init__`, it is required to have `self` as the first argument to the function. Note that `self` is not a special name in Python, you can replace `self` with anything -i.e. 
```Python
class Dinner:
	def __init__(meal,food):
		meal.food = food
```
and this will still work. However, doing this is NOT recommended since it only serves to confuse readers without achieving anything. 

*A little info on* `__init__` and `self`: 
Calling `firstCar = Car(5000,'hatchback')` invokes two special methods. The first of which is `firstCar = Car.__new__(Car)` to create a new instance `firstCar` of the `Car` class. The second of which is `Car.__int__(firstCar,5000,'hatchback','Honda')`, which intialise the `firstCar` instance with the provided arguments. The `self` name refers to the instance object `firstCar`. You will see `self` appearing in other class methods which has the same meaning. 

#### Class variables vs Instance variables
Class variables and instance variables - class variables are variables that are shared across all instances of the class. Instance variables are variables unique to each instance of the class. Variables declared OUTSIDE the  `__init__` function are class variables, and variables declared INSIDE the `__init__` function are instance variables. For example, let's modify the `Car` class definition:

```Python
class Car:
	year=2010
	def __init__(self,price:float=1000,car_type:str='sedan',manu:str='honda'):
		self.price = price
		self.car_type = car_type
		self.manu  = manu
	
	def __repr__(self):
		return f"{self.manu} - {self.car_type} - {self.price} - {self.year}"
		
if __name__ == "__main__":
	firstCar = Car(5000,'sedan','bmw')
	secondCar = Car(30000, 'SUV','toyota')
	print(firstCar)
	print(secondCar)
```

Output:
```Python
bmw - sedan - 5000 - 2010
toyota - SUV - 30000 - 2010
```
In this example, `year=1000` is the class variable which is shared among instances of the `Car` class. `price`,`car_type`,`manu` are instance variables whose values are specific to the instances. In this definition, I have also modified a special method `__repr__`, which affects the display when the class instance is printed out. In this case, I make it return a formated string containing all variables it possesses. You can access class variable directly by this format: `<classname>.var`. For example, this can be done to keep track of the number of instances created: 

```Python
class ZooAnimal:
	counter = 0 
	def __init__(self,name:str):
		self.name = name
		ZooAnimal.counter += 1
		
if __name__ == "__main__":
	lion = ZooAnimal("lion")
	tiger = ZooAnimal("tiger")
	print(f"There are {ZooAnimal.counter} animals in the zoo.")
```

Output:
```Python
There are 2 animals in the zoo.
```

Be careful when having class variables of mutable types and modifying class variables with inplace methods: 
```Python
class Animal:
	ability=[]
	habitat=[]
	
	def __init__(self,name,ability):
		self.name=name
		self.ability.append(ability)
		
	def update_habitat(self,habitat):
		self.habitat.append(habitat)
	
	def __repr__(self):
		return f"{self.name} lives in {self.habitat} and can {self.ability}."
	
if __name__=="__main__":
	tiger = Animal('tiger','roar')
	tiger.update_habitat('jungle')
	whale = Animal('whale','swim')
	whale.update_habitat('ocean')
	print(tiger)
	print(whale)
	print(tiger.ability is Animal.ability)

```
Output:
```Python
tiger lives in ['jungle', 'ocean'] and can ['roar', 'swim'].
whale lives in ['jungle', 'ocean'] and can ['roar', 'swim'].
True
```
In this example, the Animal class has two class variables `ability, habitat`, which are modified respective using the `list.append` method at `__init__` and after `update_habitat` methods. Notice how instance specific information - i.e. tiger's roar and whale's swim are appended to the class variable `ability`, and is in-turn accessible by both instances. Also notice how the variable `ability` of the instance tiger and that of the class `Animal` are the exact same object. This is in contrast to the following: 
```Python
class foo():
	counter = 0
	
	def __init__(self):
		print(self.counter is foo.counter)
		self.counter += 1
		print(self.counter is foo.counter)
		
if __name__ == "__main__":
	foo1 = foo()
	print(foo.counter, foo1.counter)
	
```
Output:
```Python
True
False
0 1
```
Note how the class variable `counter` is 0, while the instance's `counter` is now 1. This is different from the expected behaviour of having `1` for the value of the class counter. The explanation for this follows from the previous chapter: when an instance variable having the same name as the class variable is first created, it is simply a reference to the class variable - i.e. the True output on the first line refering to the result of `self.counter is foo.counter`. Re-assignment operation in the `foo` function binds the instance variable to another object without changing the class variable -i.e. the False output. In-place operations on class variables (or its reference - the instance variables) of mutable types do not change the underlying object.  

Note that for the `Animal` example, it is recommended to have `ability` and `habitat` as instance variables if you do not want information leaking: 
```Python
class Animal:	
	def __init__(self,name,ability):
		self.name=name
		self.ability=(ability)
		
		
	def update_habitat(self,habitat):
		self.habitat=(habitat)
	
	def __repr__(self):
		return f"{self.name} lives in {self.habitat} and can {self.ability}."
	
if __name__=="__main__":
	tiger = Animal('tiger','roar')
	tiger.update_habitat('jungle')
	whale = Animal('whale','swim')
	whale.update_habitat('ocean')
	print(tiger)
	print(whale)
	print(tiger.ability is whale.ability)

```
Output:
```Python
tiger lives in jungle and can roar.
whale lives in ocean and can swim.
False
```

#### Class inheritance and polymorphism
The syntax for inhertiance is simply:
```Python
class DerivedClass(Base1,Base2,Base3):
	pass
```
in which the `DerivedClass` is inherited from base classes `Base1,Base2,Base3`. Note that the name `Base1,Base2,Base3` must be in the same module as `DerivedClass`. If you want to inherit a particular class -i.e. `Base1` from some module, you can import the module into the current namespace, and define the derived class as follows:

```Python
import newModule

class DerivedClass(newModule.Base1):
	pass
```

 When the class object is constructed, the base class is remembered. This is used for resolving attribute references: if a requested attribute is not found in the class, the search proceeds to look in the base class. This rule is applied recursively if the base class itself is derived from some other class. Derived classes may override methods of their base classes. Because methods have no special privileges when calling other methods of the same object, a method of a base class that calls another method defined in the same base class may end up calling a method of a derived class that overrides it. (For C++ programmers: all methods in Python are effectively `virtual`.) This is best demonstrated via the following example:

```Python
class Animal:
	def __init__(self,name):
		self.name=name
		self.year=2020
		self.display_ability()
		self.display_habitat()
		
	def display_ability(self):
		print(f"{self.name} is now showing its ability!")
		
	def display_habitat(self):
		print(f"{self.name} comes from unknown places !")
		
class Aquatic_Animal(Animal):
	def __init__(self,name,habitat):
		self.ability = "swim"
		self.habitat = habitat
		super().__init__(name)
		print(f"This information is collected in {self.year}.")
	
	def display_ability(self):
		super().display_ability()
		print(f"{self.name} can {self.ability}")
	
	def display_habitat(self):
		print(f"{self.name} can be found in {self.habitat}")
		
if __name__=="__main__":
	alien = Animal("alien")
	shark = Aquatic_Animal("shark","the ocean")
```

Output:

```Python
alien is now showing its ability!
alien comes from unknown places !
shark is now showing its ability!
shark can swim
shark can be found in the ocean
```
In this example, we have a base class `Animal` and a derived class `Aquatic_Animal`. The class `Animal` has the variables `name` and `year`, and the class `Aquatic_Animal` has the variables `name` initialised through the parent's class via `super().__init__(name)`, `habitat` and `ability` defined in its `__init__`, and `year` inherited from the parent class after `super().__init__(name)` is called (you can print out `dir(self)` at init to check). Note that calling `super().method(args)` is equivalent to calling `BaseClass.method(args)` - i.e. when calling `super().__init__(name)`, we are infact calling `Animal.__init__(self,name)`, which 
- Binds `name` to the `self`'s namspace,
- Creates a variable `year=2020` in the `self`'s namespace,
- Invokes two functions `display_ability` and `display_habitat`. 
Notice how in the `Aquatic_Animal` class, we have modified the two `display` methods:
- The new `display_ability` extends upon the parent class' method of the same name by first invoking `super().display_ability()` and then adding new changes.
- The new `display_habitat` completely overwrites the parent class' method. 
We see in the output that the function calls defined in the parent's `__init__` actually call the updated method defined in the derived class. 

For multiple-inheritance - i.e a derived class inheriting from multiple base classes:
```Python
class DerivedClass(Base1,Base2,Base3):
	pass
```

In the simplest cases, you can think of the search for attributes inherited from a parent class as depth-first, left-to-right, not searching twice in the same class where there is an overlap in the hierarchy. Thus, if an attribute is not found in `DerivedClassName`, it is searched for in `Base1`, then (recursively) in the base classes of `Base1`, and if it was not found there, it was searched for in `Base2`, and so on.
