### More on `super` method
To be updated. Don't care too much about this if you dont plan on having a complex inheritance tree. 

### Iterator/Generator 
You can transform a class into an `iterator` simply by defining the `__iter__` and `__next__` methods. If `__next__` is provided, `__iter__` can just return `self`. If `__iter__` returns an iterator object, calling `__next__` will call the `__next__` method of the returned iterator. You can choose to define `StopIteration` exception or ommit it for inifinite evaluation (-i.e infitnite length sequence). 

Generators or generator functions are a simple and powerful tool for creating iterators. They are written like regular functions but use the `yield` whenever they want to return data. Each time `next()` is called on it, the generator resumes where it left off (it remembers all the data values and which statement was last executed). An example shows that generators can be trivially easy to create:

Anything that can be done with generators can also be done with class-based iterators as described in the previous section. What makes generators so compact is that the `__iter__()` and `__next__()` methods are created automatically.

Another key feature is that the local variables and execution state are automatically saved between calls. This made the function easier to write and much more clear than an approach using instance variables like `self.index` and `self.data`.

In addition to automatic method creation and saving program state, when generators terminate, they automatically raise `StopIteration`. In combination, these features make it easy to create iterators with no more effort than writing a regular function.

Each `yield` temporarily suspends processing, remembering the location execution state (including local variables and pending try-statements). When the _generator iterator_ resumes, it picks up where it left off (in contrast to functions which start fresh on every invocation).

**Summary**
- You can transform a class into an iterator type (when defining new data types).
- If you don't need something so powerful as an iterator class, you can use generator functions. 

#### Special methods:
##### User-defined functions
User-defined functions is created using the function definition format. Some useful-to-know attributes: 
- `__doc__`: documentation string
- `__name__`: function's name
- `__module__`: module the function was defined in. Note that the global scope of the function is the global scope of the module it was defined in.
- `__globals__`: (read-only) a reference to the dictionary of the function's global variables. i.e. the global namespace of the function's `__module__`.
- `__dict__`: the namespace of supporting function's attributes. Note that you can assign attributes to a function - i.e. `foo.x = 10`, and the calling `foo.__dict__` will show `{'x'=10}`.
- `__annotations__`: show function's type hints.
- `__kwdefaults__`: default values and associated keywords.
- `__call__`: this method will be invoked anytime the function is called - i.e. `math.sqrt(4)` is equivalent to `math.sqrt.__call__(4)`

#### Class and Instance Methods: 
- `__self__`: class instance object. If `x` is an instance of class `C`, and `f` is an instance method of `C`, `x.f.__self__` is `x`. This is because `x.f` is a method bounded to instance `x`. Additionally, `C.f` is a function (not a method) and does not have the `__self__` attribute. If `g` is a class method of `C`, it is bounded to class `C` itself, and `C.g.__self__` or `x.g.__self__` is `C`. If `h` is a static method of `C`,  it is treated as a vanilla function and does not have the `__self__` attribute. Knowing this is important: if `__self__` is a class instance, the instance method has access to instance attributes. If `__self__` is the class itself, the class method has access to the class attributes (not the instance attributes). A static method has no access to either the class nor the instance attributes. 
- `__func__`: refer to the function object. 
- `__name__`: the method's name - similar to `__function__.__name__`.
- `__doc__`: the method's documentation - similar to `__function__.__doc__`.

When an instance or a class method is class,  its `__func__` is called, with the right argument for `__self__` (either the instance or the class). 

#### Emulating container types:
- `obj.__contains__(self,item)`:  test for membership - allows for the operation `item in obj`. For objections in which the `__contains__()` method is not defined, membership test first tries iteration via `__iter__()` - it produces all `y` produced from calling `__next__` and return True if one of the produced `y` is the `item`. If `__iter__` is not defined, the membership test searches `__getitem__` in a similar manner. 
- `iterator.__iter__(self)`: this method is called when an iterator is required for a container. This returns a new iterator object. For mapping objects, this should return an iterator over the keys. 
- `iterator.__next__()`: return the next item from the iterator and raise `StopIteration` exception if running out of item. 
- `obj.__len__(self)`: call to implement the built-in function `len(obj)`. Should be implemented to return the length of an object. 
- `obj.__getitem__(self,key)`: call to implement the evaluation `self[key]`. Note that user can define whether `key` can be negative. 
- `obj.__setitem__(self,key,value)`: implement the assignment operation to `self[key]`. 
- `obj.__delitem__(self,key)`: implement `del(self[key])`.
- `obj.__missing__(self,key)`: relevant for mapping objects - define what would happen if a `key` is  not in the object. 
- `obj.__reversed__(self)`: implement `reversed(obj)` - should return a reverse iterator.

#### Other customisations:
- `obj.__new__(cls,**kwargs)`: call to create a new instance of class `cls`. The remaining arguments are those passed to the object constructor expression. If `__new__()` is invoked during object construction and it returns an instance of _cls_, then the new instance’s `__init__` method will be invoked like `__init__(self,**kwargs)`, where _self_ is the new instance and the remaining arguments are the same as were passed to the object constructor. If `__new__()` does not return an instance of _cls_, then the new instance’s `__init__()` will not be invoked. 

- `obj.__init__(self,**kwargs)`: called after the instance has been created (by `__new__()` but before it is returned to the caller. The arguments are those passed to the class constructor expression. If a base class has an `__init__()` method, the derived class’s `__init__()` method, if any, must explicitly call it to ensure proper initialization of the base class part of the instance; for example: `super().__init__([args...])`.
- `obj.__repr__(self)`: called by the built-in function `repr()` to compute the official string representation of the object. If `__repr__()` is defined by `__str__()` is not, then `__repr__()` is also called whenever `__str__()` methods are called. 
- `obj.__str__(self)`: called by `str(obj)` and `print(obj)` and `format(obj)`. This should be a string object. 
- `obj.__lt__(self,other)`: implement less than check with the `other` object. Other variants are `__eq__`, `__neq__`,`__gt__`, `__le__`, `__ge__` for equal to, non equal to, greater than, less than or equal to, and greather than or equal to checks. -i.e. Calling `x.__le__(y)` is equivalent to `x <= y`. A rich comparison method may return the singleton `NotImplemented` if it does not implement the operation for a given pair of arguments. By convention, `False` and `True` are returned for a successful comparison. However, these methods can return any value, so if the comparison operator is used in a Boolean context (e.g., in the condition of an `if` statement), Python will call `bool` on the value to determine if the result is true or false.

### Decorator
Decorators, in the simplest terms, are functions that take as input a function to `return` the received function, but with some modifications applied. For instance: 

```Python
def print_detail(func):
	def wraper():
		print(func.__doc__)
		func()
	return wraper

def print_welcome_message():
	'''Function to print welcoming message'''
	print("Hi, welcome!")
	
if __name__=="__main__":
	print_welcome_message = print_detail(print_welcome_message)
	print_welcome_message()
```

Output:
```
Function to print welcoming message
Hi, welcome!
```

In the above example, the `print_detail` function takes as an argument a function and display its doc string together with the output. The idea of a wrapper is you want to apply modifications to the output without changing how the function is called. For instance, you still want to call the base function like how you would call it without a decorator: `print_welcome_message()`. This is done by the first line in the main body. We assign the `print_welcome_message` name to the output of the `print_detail` decorator, and we can therefore invoke the `print_welcome_message` like how we would normally, except that it has now been decorated and has its doc-string printed. 

The following example is NOT a decorator:

```Python
def print_detail(func):
	print(func.__doc__)
	func()

def print_welcome_message():
	'''Function to print welcoming message'''
	print("Hi, welcome!")

if __name__ == "__main__":
	print_detail(print_welcome_message)
```

The difference comes from the `print_detail` function invoking the input function directly instead of returning it, hence we cannot assign the name of the original function to the modified function - i.e. there is no way of calling `print_welcome_message` with the modified output. 

Instead of the clunking way to reassign name: `func = decorate(func)`, we can simply use the syntax:
```Python
@decorator_func
def func_to_decorate():
	pass
```

Now, calling the `func_to_decorate` will have the modifications applied. For example: 
```Python
def print_detail(func):
	def wraper():
		print(func.__doc__)
		func()
	return wraper

@print_detail
def print_welcome_message():
	'''Function to print welcoming message'''
	print("Hi, welcome!")

if __name__ == "__main__":
	print_welcome_message()

```
The output of this is the same as the first example. If your function takes in input arguments, you can make modifications to the wrapper to reflect this: 

```Python
def print_detail(func):
	def wrapper(*args,**kwargs):
		print(func.__doc__)
		func(*args,**kwargs)
	return wrapper

@print_detail
def add(x,y):
	"Add two numbers"
	print(x + y)

if __name__ == "__main__":
	add(4,5)
```
Output:
```Python
Add two numbers
9
```

On the other hand, if your function returns something, you can also make it so that the wrapper returns the result of the decorated function:
```Python
def print_detail(func):
	def wrapper(*args,**kwargs):
		print(func.__doc__)
		return(func(*args,**kwargs))
	return wrapper

@print_detail
def add(x,y):
	"Add two numbers"
	print(x + y)

if __name__ == "__main__":
	print(add(4,5))
```

The difference in this case, comes from having the inner function returning the result of the function call, instead of just printting it out. 

There are many cases when a decorator can be helpful - 
- For recursive calculations that benefit from remembering previous states - i.e. calculating Fibonacci sequence, a decorator can be use to store previous states in memory and hence speed up calculation.
- When you want to do compare the run-time experimentally of different algorithms. 
- When you want to apply a common modification to many functions. 

Let's give ourselves another example - 
E.g. Bench-marking sorting algorithms with a time wrapper
```Python
from time import time 
import numpy as np 

#Bench mark wrapper:
def bench_mark(repeat=1000,get_mean=True,get_stdev=True):
	def bench_mark_decorator(func):
		def wrapper(*args,**kwargs):
			duration = []
			for i in range(repeat):
				start = time()
				output = func(*args,**kwargs)
				end = time()
				duration.append((end - start))
			duration = np.array(duration)
			mean = duration.mean()
			stdev = duration.std()
			if get_mean:
				print(f"Average running time for {repeat} repeats: {mean}")
			if get_stdev:
				print(f"Stdev running time for {repeat} repeats: {stdev}")
			return output
		return wrapper
	return bench_mark_decorator

@bench_mark(100,True,False)
def insertion_sort(array:list):
	'''Insertion sort of a given array'''
	new_array = array.copy()
	for i in range(1,len(new_array)):
		key = new_array[i]
		for j in range(i,-1,-1):
			if key < new_array[j]: 
				new_array[j+1] = new_array[j]
				new_array[j]=key
	return new_array

if __name__=="__main__":
	output = insertion_sort(array=[4,3,2,1])
	print(output)
```
Output:
```Python
Average running time for 100 repeats: 1.0001659393310548e-05
[1, 2, 3, 4]
```

Another example: 
```Python
  

import json

def file_output(filename:str):

 def outter_wraper(func):

 def wraper(*args,**kwargs):

 output = func(*args,**kwargs) #Output is assumed to be a dictionaryu

 #Check if output is dict

 if not isinstance(output,dict):

 raise ValueError("Function output must be a dictionary")

 #Dumping the output

 with open(filename,'w') as output_file:

 json.dump(output,output_file)

 return output

 return wraper

 return outter_wraper

  

@file_output("dict_gen.json")

def dict_generator(min_val=0,max_val=10):

 return {str(i):i for i in range(min_val,max_val)}

  

@file_output("Square_gen.json")

def square_generator(min_val=0,max_val=10):

 return {str(i):i**2 for i in range(min_val,max_val)}

  
  

if __name__ == "__main__":

 print(dict_generator(0,5))

 print(square_generator(0,5))
```

```Python
  

from time import time

import functools

import sys

sys.setrecursionlimit(10000)

  

def timeit(func,*args,**kwargs):

 start = time()

 output = func(*args,**kwargs)

 end = time()

 print(f"Duration: {(end-start)} seconds!")

 return output

  

def dict_caching(func):

 cache = {}

 def wraper(n):

 if n in cache:

 return cache[n]

 else:

 output = func(n)

 cache[n] = output

 return output

 return wraper

  

cache = {}

def factorial_with_caching(n):

 if n in cache:

 return cache[n]

 else:

 output = n * factorial_with_caching(n-1) if n>1 else 1

 cache[n]=output

 return output 

  

if __name__ == "__main__":

 timeit(factorial_with_caching,1e3)

 timeit(factorial_with_caching,1500)

```

### The `property` decorator:
